# Thoughts on engineering by engineers

A collection of writings by engineers about engineering. 


## What Engineers Know and How They Know It (Vincente)

This view of technology-and hence engineering-as other than science accords
with statements sometimes made by engineers, such as the following by a
British engineer to the Royal Aeronautical Society in 1922: "Aeroplanes are
not designed by science, but by art in spite of some pretence and humbug to
the contrary. I do not mean to suggest for one moment that engineering can do
without science, on the contrary, it stands on scientific foundations, but
there is a big gap between scientific researh and the engineering product
which has to be bridged by the art of the engineer." The creative,
constructive knowledge of the engineer is the knowledge needed to implement
that art. Technological knowledge in this view appears enormously richer and
more interesting than it does as applied science. (p4)

Engineering can, in fact, be defined in terms of these ends, as in the following quotation from
another British engineer, G.F.C. Rogers:

> Engineering refers to the practice of organizing the design and construction [and, I would add, operation] of any artifice which transforms the physical world around us to meet some recognized need. (p6)

Since calculation of practical viscous flows was beyond the reach of theory in the 1930s (difficulties exist even today), profile drag and other aerodynamic characteristics of airfoil sections had to be found by testing wings in a wind tunnel and subtracting out the calculated plaform effects. Development of airfoils was thus largely an empirical activity (p20).

If, with philosopher Philip Rhinelander, we take wisdom to be "the art of making correct decisions on insufficient evidence, under conditions of uncertainty," then good design judgment clearly qualifies as a form of wisdom. (p46)

Functional failure, presumptive anomaly, and the need to reduce uncertainty in design thus appear as three distinct, if often concurrent, driving forces (or sources) for the growth of engineering knowledge (p47).

A pilot and aircrqaft, taken together, form a single dynaic system, with
feedback loops to the pilot via the feel of the cockpit controls plus cues
from instruments and from vehicle orientation and acceleration. The pilot is a dynamic part of this *closed-loop system* (to use modern terminology) and sense him- or herself as such. (p76)

The background for this reversal (that is, the quarter century in which the aeronautical community was blinded by concern for the long-period oscillation) provides a cautionary example of how preconceived, uncritical use of mathematical theory can mislead in practice. (p94)

The history of flying qualities also illustrates what Constant calls "traditions of practice" in technology, which he defines as "conventional system[s] for accomplishing a specified technical task." (p106)

Finally, some remarks about the consensus on stability in the 1920s, which
epitomizes the essentially engineering nature of the flying-quality work. The
conclusion that airplanes ought to be inherently stable but not too much so
was a judgment rendered, not from careful delibration by an individual or
individuals, but more or less instinctively by the flying-quality community
as a whole. It was arrived at gradually in the first three decades of the
century by relating the growing, objective knowlege of stabilty and control
to the similarly growing body of subjective piloting experience with
expanding flying tasks. The otucome was a balance, or tradeoff, between
conflicting requirements—control versus stability—of a kidn that engineers
often find necessary. Teh necessity, here, however, did not arise, as
engineering tradeoffs often do, for economic reasons. Neither did it derive,
of itself, from purely theoretical requirements—it came into being because of
the practical needs and limitations of teh human pilot. The balance therefore
could not have been achieved on purely intellectual grounds and without
extensive flight experience. It summarized a practical design judgment (based
in this case on subjecive opinion) of a sort that cannot be avoided in
engineering. Achieving such judgment—and these remarks apply equally to the
flying-quality work as a whole—involved elements that can properly be
regarded as science (e.g., teh analysis of dynamic response by applied
mathematicians). Predominantly, however, it called for a great deal more than
simply the applicaiton of scientific knowledge and principles. It required a
complex interaction of intellectual and experiential elemntes reacting to and
going on within a context of practical design demands. This "great deal more"
provides evidence, if such is still needed, of the epistemological difference
between applied science and engineering. (p107)

## The Civilized Engineer (Florman)

Strictly speaking, the engineering profession came into being in the
eigteenth century when science was first applied to the solution fo technical
problems. But by adhering ot such a standard-by insisting that without
scinece there is no engineering-we would exclude from our family tree many
geniuses, from the builders fo the pyramids to the inventors of the steam
engine, and this we refuse to do. (p26)

No matter how closely modern engineering becomes idetnified with science, no matter how electronic or theoretical its practice, no matter how much a group enterprise it may be, the end product of which seems remote and abstract, it can never be-should never be- servered from its origins in craftsmanship (p29).


 
## Akin's Laws of Spacecraft Design

Excerpted from David Akin's website: <https://spacecraft.ssl.umd.edu/akins_laws.html>. These are the ones most relevant to software engineers.

Design is an iterative process. The necessary number of iterations is one more than the number you have currently done. This is true at any point in time.

Your best design efforts will inevitably wind up being useless in the final design. Learn to live with the disappointment.

Not having all the information you need is never a satisfactory excuse for not starting the analysis.

When in doubt, estimate. In an emergency, guess. But be sure to go back and clean up the mess when the real numbers come along.

Sometimes, the fastest way to get to the end is to throw everything out and start over.

There is never a single right solution. There are always multiple wrong ones, though.

(Shea's Law) The ability to improve a design occurs primarily at the interfaces. This is also the prime location for screwing it up.

Past experience is excellent for providing a reality check. Too much reality can doom an otherwise worthwhile design, though.

A bad design with a good presentation is doomed eventually. A good design with a bad presentation is doomed immediately.

(Larrabee's Law) Half of everything you hear in a classroom is crap. Education is figuring out which half is which.

When in doubt, document. (Documentation requirements will reach a maximum shortly after the termination of a program.)

The schedule you develop will seem like a complete work of fiction up until the time your customer fires you for not meeting it.

It's called a "Work Breakdown Structure" because the Work remaining will grow until you have a Breakdown, unless you enforce some Structure on it.

(Varsi's Law) Schedules only move in one direction.

(von Tiesenhausen's Law of Program Management) To get an accurate estimate of final program requirements, multiply the initial time estimates by pi, and slide the decimal point on the cost estimates one place to the right.

(Atkin's Law of Demonstrations) When the hardware is working perfectly, the really important visitors don't show up.

(Patton's Law of Program Planning) A good plan violently executed now is better than a perfect plan next week.

(Roosevelt's Law of Task Planning) Do what you can, where you are, with what you have.

(de Saint-Exupery's Law of Design) A designer knows that they have achieved perfection not when there is nothing left to add, but when there is nothing left to take away.

Any run-of-the-mill engineer can design something which is elegant. A good engineer designs systems to be efficient. A great engineer designs them to be effective.

(McBryan's Law) You can't make it better until you make it work.

There's never enough time to do it right, but somehow, there's always enough time to do it over.

You really understand something the third time you see it (or the first time you teach it.)


